docs: add migration guides and tutorial (#999)
data-apis/array-api: spec/2025.12/migration_guide.md

or statsmodels. If your software relies on a certain array producing library,
such as NumPy or JAX, then here you can learn how to make it library agnostic
and interchange them with way less friction.

## Ecosystem

Apart from the documented standard, the Array API ecosystem also provides
a set of tools and packages to help you with the migration process:

(array-api-compat)=

### Array API Compat

GitHub: [array-api-compat](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat)

Although NumPy, Dask, CuPy, and PyTorch support the Array API Standard, there
are still some corner cases where their behavior diverges from the standard.
`array-api-compat` provides a compatibility layer to cover these cases as well.
This is also accompanied by a few utility functions for easier introspection
into array objects.

(array-api-strict)=

### Array API Strict

GitHub: [array-api-strict](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict)

`array-api-strict` is a library that provides a strict and minimal
implementation of the Array API Standard. It is designed to be used as
a reference implementation for testing and development purposes. By comparing

> your API calls with `array-api-strict` counterparts, you can ensure that your

Reviewer: This suggestion reads as aimed at array API producers. Consider expanding to mention that an array API consumer can run their test suite with array-api-strict as a producer.

As a larger edit, consider briefly stressing in these short descriptions that array-api-compat is mainly for consumer's code, array-api-strict is a testing implement, also mostly for a consumer; array-api-tests is for a producer. While you are discussing this in more detail below, I think it'd be helpful to stress it in the very beginning, too.

Author: Done - I added a `User group` clause to each library and mentioned how producers/consumers use it.

[API specification](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/index.html)
page.

There, each function, constant, and object is described with details
on parameters, return values, and special cases.

### Testing against Array API

There are two main ways to test your API for compliance: Either using
`array-api-tests` suite or testing your API manually against `array-api-strict`
reference implementation.

#### Array API Test suite (Recommended)

{ref}`array-api-tests` is a test suite which verifies that your API
for adhering to the standard. For each function or method it confirms
it's importable, verifies the signature, and generates multiple test
cases with hypothesis package and runs asserts for the outputs.

The setup details are enclosed in the GitHub repository, so here we
cover only the minimal workflow:

1. Install your package, for example in editable mode.
2. Clone `array-api-tests`, and set `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment
   variable to your package import name.
3. Inside the `array-api-tests` directory run `pytest` command. There are
   multiple useful options delivered by the test suite, a few worth mentioning:

>    - `--max-examples=2` - maximal number of test cases to generate by the

Reviewer: Please show a larger value, at least `--max-examples=100` or `1000`. That `hypothesis` is not deterministic is very much not obvious for a casual reader. Running two examples (one for "unvectorized" tests) would pretty much only check that a function imports.

Author: Done

     hypothesis. This allows you to balance between execution time of the test
     suite and thoroughness of the testing.
   - With `--xfails-file` option you can describe which tests are expected to
     fail - it's impossible to get the whole API perfectly implemented on a
     first try, so tracking what still fails gives you more control over the
     state of your API.
   - `-o xfail_strict=<bool>` is often used with the previous one. If a test
     expected to fail actually passes (`XPASS`) then you can decide whether
     to ignore that fact or raise it as an error.

>    - `--skips-file` for skipping files. At times some failing tests might stall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `--skips-file` for skipping tests. At times some failing tests might stall
```

Author: Done

     the execution time of the test suite - in that case the most convenient
     option is to skip these for the time being.

We strongly advise you to embed this setup in your CI as well. This will allow
you to monitor the coverage live, and make sure new changes don't break existing
API. For a reference here's a [NumPy Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).

#### Array API Strict

A simpler, and more manual, way of testing the Array API coverage is to
run your API calls along with {ref}`array-api-strict` Python implementation.

This way you can ensure the outputs coming from your API match the minimal

> reference implementation, but bare in mind you need to write the tests cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reference implementation, but bear in mind you need to write the tests cases
```

Author: Done

yourself, so you need to also take into account the edge cases as well.

(array-consumers)=

## Array Consumers

For array consumers the main premise is keep in mind that your **array
manipulation operations should not lock in for a particular array producing
library**. For instance, if you use NumPy for arrays, then your code could
contain:

```python
import numpy as np

# ...
b = np.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = np.mean(a, axis=0)
return np.dot(c, b)
```

The first step should be as simple as assigning `np` namespace to a dedicated
namespace variable - the convention in the ecosystem is to name it `xp`. Then

> Making sure that each method and function call is something that Array API

Reviewer: typo "Then Making sure...."

Author: Done

supports is vital (we will get to that soon):

```python
import numpy as np

xp = np

# ...
b = xp.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = xp.mean(a, axis=0)
return xp.tensordot(c, b, axes=1)
```

Then replacing one backend with another one should rely on providing a different
namespace, such as: `xp = torch`, e.g. via environment variable. This can be useful
if you're writing a script or in your custom software. The other alternatives are:

- If you are building a library where the backend is determined by input arrays
  passed by the end-user, then a recommended way is to ask your input arrays for a

>   namespace to use: `xp = arr.__array_namespace__()`

Reviewer: For consumers, the support is less than ideal, consider mentioning `array-api-compat` and `array_namespace` function already?

```
In [9]: for xp in [np, torch, jnp, cupy, da, array_api_strict]:
   ...:     try:
   ...:         xp.ones(3).__array_namespace__()
   ...:         print(f"{xp.__name__}  check")
   ...:     except:
   ...:         print(f"{xp.__name__}  nope")
   ...: 
numpy  check
torch  nope
jax.numpy  check
cupy  nope
dask.array  nope
array_api_strict  check
```

Author: Done - I mentioned `array_api_compat.array_namespace()` as well there.

- Each function you implement can have a namespace `xp` as a parameter in the
  signature. Then enforcing inputs to be of type by the provided backend can be

>   achieved with `arg1 = xp.asarray(arg1)` for each input array.

Reviewer: If this is a first tutorial for a beginner, I think it could be helpful to be a bit more descriptive and a bit more opinionated. Roughly, 

- for a function which accepts array arguments, use
```
def func(array1, scalar1, scalar2):
    xp = array1.__array_namespace__()     # or array_namespace(array1)
    return xp.arange(scalar1, scalar2) @ array1
```

- for a function that accepts scalars and returns arrays, use
```
def func(s1, s2, xp):
   return xp.arange(s1, s2)
```

If you prefer to not clutter the short guide with details, consider adding them to a separate page and linking from the short guide.

Author: Done

(migration-guide)=

# Migration Guide

This page is meant to help migrate your codebase to an Array API compliant
implementation. The guide is divided into two parts and, depending on your
exact use-case, you should look thoroughly into at least one of them.

> The first part  is dedicated for {ref}`array-producers`. If your library

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first part is dedicated for {ref}`array-producers`. If your library
```

Author: done

> mimics e.g. NumPy's or Dask's functionality, then you can find there an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mimics, for example, NumPy's or Dask's functionality, then you can find in the first part
```

Author: done

additional instructions and guidance on how to ensure downstream users can
easily pick your solution as an array provider for their system/algorithm.

The second part delves into details for Array API compatibility for
{ref}`array-consumers`. This pertains to any software that performs

> multidimensional array manipulation in Python, such as: scikit-learn, SciPy,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multidimensional array manipulation in Python, such as may be found in scikit-learn, SciPy,
```

Author: done

or statsmodels. If your software relies on a certain array producing library,

> such as NumPy or JAX, then here you can learn how to make it library agnostic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
such as NumPy or JAX, then you can use the second part to learn how to make it library agnostic
```

Author: done

> and interchange them with way less friction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and interchange array namespaces with significantly less friction.
```

Author: done

## Ecosystem

Apart from the documented standard, the Array API ecosystem also provides
a set of tools and packages to help you with the migration process:

(array-api-compat)=

### Array API Compat

GitHub: [array-api-compat](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat)
User group: Array Consumers

Although NumPy, Dask, CuPy, and PyTorch support the Array API Standard, there
are still some corner cases where their behavior diverges from the standard.

> `array-api-compat` provides a compatibility layer to cover these cases as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`array-api-compat` provides a compatibility layer to cover these cases.
```

Author: done

This is also accompanied by a few utility functions for easier introspection

> into array objects. As an array consumer you can still rely on the original API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into array objects. As an array consumer, you can still rely on the original API
```

Author: done

while having access to the standard compatible one.

(array-api-strict)=

### Array API Strict

GitHub: [array-api-strict](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict)
User group: Array Consumers, Array Producers (for testing)

`array-api-strict` is a library that provides a strict and minimal

> implementation of the Array API Standard. For array producers it is designed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implementation of the Array API Standard. For array producers, it is designed
```

Author: done

to be used as a reference implementation for testing and development purposes.

> You can compare your API calls with `array-api-strict` counterparts,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can compare your API calls with `array-api-strict` counterparts
```

Author: done

and ensure that your library is fully compliant with the standard and can
serve as a reliable reference for other developers in the ecosystem.

> For consumers you can use `array-api-strict` during the development as an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For consumers, you can use `array-api-strict` during the development as an
```

Author: done

array provider to ensure your code uses API compliant with the standard.

(array-api-tests)=

### Array API Test

GitHub: [array-api-tests](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-tests)
User group: Array Producers

`array-api-tests` is a collection of tests that can be used to verify the
compliance of your library with the Array API Standard. It includes tests
for array producers, covering a wide range of functionalities and use cases.
By running these tests, you can ensure that your library adheres to the
standard and can be used with compatible array consumers libraries.

(array-api-extra)=

### Array API Extra

GitHub: [array-api-extra](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-extra)
User group: Array Consumers

`array-api-extra` is a collection of additional utilities and tools that are
missing from the Array API Standard but can be useful for compliant array
consumers. It includes additional array manipulation and statistical functions.
It is already used by SciPy and scikit-learn.

The sections below mention when and how to use them.

(array-producers)=

## Array Producers

For array producers, the central task during the development/migration process

> is adhering user-facing API to the Array API Standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is ensuring that the user-facing API adheres to the Array API Standard.
```

Author: done

The complete API of the standard is documented on the
[API specification](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/index.html)

> page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The complete API of the standard is documented in the
[API specification](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/index.html).
```

Author: done

There, each function, constant, and object is described with details
on parameters, return values, and special cases.

### Testing against Array API

> There are two main ways to test your API for compliance: Either using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two main ways to test your API for compliance: either using
```

Author: done

> `array-api-tests` suite or testing your API manually against `array-api-strict`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`array-api-tests` suite or testing your API manually against the `array-api-strict`
```

Author: done

reference implementation.

#### Array API Test suite (Recommended)

{ref}`array-api-tests` is a test suite which verifies that your API

> for adhering to the standard. For each function or method it confirms

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
adheres to the standard. For each function or method, it confirms
```

Author: done

it's importable, verifies the signature, and generates multiple test
cases with [hypothesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

> package and runs asserts for the outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it's importable, verifies the signature, generates multiple test
cases with [hypothesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
package, and runs assertions on the outputs.
```

Author: done

The setup details are enclosed in the GitHub repository, so here we
cover only the minimal workflow:

1. Install your package, for example in editable mode.
2. Clone `array-api-tests`, and set `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment
   variable to your package import name.
3. Inside the `array-api-tests` directory run `pytest` command. There are

>    multiple useful options delivered by the test suite, a few worth mentioning:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   multiple useful options delivered by the test suite. A few worth mentioning:
```

Author: done

   - `--max-examples=1000` - maximal number of test cases to generate by the
     hypothesis. This allows you to balance between execution time of the test
     suite and thoroughness of the testing. It's advised to use as many examples
     as the time buget can fit. Each test case is a random combination of
     possible inputs: the more cases, the higher chance of finding an unsupported
     edge case.

>    - With `--xfails-file` option you can describe which tests are expected to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - With the `--xfails-file` option, you can describe which tests are expected to
```

Author: done

>      fail - it's impossible to get the whole API perfectly implemented on a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     fail. It's impossible to get the whole API perfectly implemented on a
```

Author: done

     first try, so tracking what still fails gives you more control over the
     state of your API.
   - `-o xfail_strict=<bool>` is often used with the previous one. If a test

>      expected to fail actually passes (`XPASS`) then you can decide whether

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     expected to fail actually passes (`XPASS`), then you can decide whether
```

Author: done

     to ignore that fact or raise it as an error.

>    - `--skips-file` for skipping tests. At times some failing tests might stall

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `--skips-file` for skipping tests. At times, some failing tests might stall
```

Author: done

>      the execution time of the test suite - in that case the most convenient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     the execution time of the test suite. In that case, the most convenient
```

Author: done

     option is to skip these for the time being.

We strongly advise you to embed this setup in your CI as well. This will allow
you to monitor the coverage live, and make sure new changes don't break existing

> API. For a reference here's a [NumPy Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
APIs. For a reference, here's a [NumPy Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).
```

Author: done

#### Array API Strict

A simpler, and more manual, way of testing the Array API coverage is to

> run your API calls along with {ref}`array-api-strict` Python implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
run your API calls along with the {ref}`array-api-strict` Python implementation.
```

Author: done

This way you can ensure the outputs coming from your API match the minimal

> reference implementation, but bear in mind you need to write the tests cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reference implementation. Bear in mind, however, that you need to write the tests cases
```

Author: done

yourself, so you need to also take into account the edge cases as well.

(array-consumers)=

## Array Consumers

> For array consumers the main premise is to keep in mind that your **array

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For array consumers, the main premise is to keep in mind that your **array
```

Author: done

manipulation operations should not lock in for a particular array producing
library**. For instance, if you use NumPy for arrays, then your code could
contain:

```python
import numpy as np

# ...
b = np.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = np.mean(a, axis=0)
return np.dot(c, b)
```

The first step should be as simple as assigning `np` namespace to a dedicated

> namespace variable - the convention in the ecosystem is to name it `xp`. Then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
namespace variable. The convention in the ecosystem is to name it `xp`. Then
```

Author: done

  provided backend can be achieved with `arg1 = xp.asarray(arg1)` for each input:
  ```python
  def func(s1, s2, xp):
    return xp.arange(s1, s2)
  ```

If you're relying on NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch, Dask, or JAX then
{ref}`array-api-compat` can come in handy for the transition. The compat layer
allows you to still rely on your selection of array producing library, while
making sure you're already using standard compatible API. Additionally, it
offers a set of useful utility functions, such as:

- [array_namespace()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.array_namespace)
  for fetching the namespace based on input arrays.
- [is_array_api_obj()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.is_array_api_obj)
  for the introspection whether a given object is Array API compatible.
- [device()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.device)
  to get a device the array resides on.

For now the migration from a specific library (e.g. NumPy) to a standard compatible
setup requires a manual intervention for each failing API call but in the future

> we plan to provide some automation tools for it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now. the migration from a specific library (e.g., NumPy) to a standard compatible
setup requires a manual intervention for each failing API call, but, in the future,
we plan to provide some automation tools for it.
```

Author: done
